.\" gtserver man page
.if !\n(.g \{\
.	if !\w|\*(lq| \{\
.		ds lq ``
.		if \w'\(lq' .ds lq "\(lq
.	\}
.	if !\w|\*(rq| \{\
.		ds rq ''
.		if \w'\(rq' .ds rq "\(rq
.	\}
.\}
.ie t .ds Tx \s-1T\v'.4n'\h'-.1667'E\v'-.4n'\h'-.125'X\s0
. el  .ds Tx TeX
.de Id
. ds Yr \\$4
. substring Yr 0 3
. ds Mn \\$4
. substring Mn 5 6
. ds Dy \\$4
. substring Dy 8 9
. \" ISO 8601 date, complete format, extended representation
. ds Dt \\*(Yr-\\*(Mn-\\*(Dy
..
.TH gtserver 1 
.hy 0
.
.SH NAME 
gtserver \- transfer genomic data reliably across a network
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gtserver 
.I path
.B -q
.I work-queue
.B -c 
.I cred
.B --security-api 
.I signing-URI
[
.B --foreground 
|
.B --pidfile
.I Pid-File
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B GeneTorrent
is a suite of file transfer applications designed for the optimal
transfer of genomic data across a computer network.  File transfers
using GeneTorrent are designed to be authenticated, secure, reliable,
and efficient.
.PP
GeneTorrent has 3 applications: gtupload, gtdownload, and gtserver.
The upload application is used to send files to the repository.
The download application is used to retrieve files from the repository.
The server application is used within the repository to create GeneTorrent
server instances that deliver data to download actors.
.PP
This man page describes 
.B gtserver 
(the GeneTorrent server application).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "path"
Required.
.I path
is the absolute or relative path to the directory under which the data
files being shared are to be found.  Note that UUID is always be added
to
.I path\fR,\fP
so data files will be found at 
.I path\fR/\fPUUID\fR.\fP
.TP
.BI \-q " work-queue" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-queue" " work-queue"
Required.  
.I work-queue
is the absolute or relative path to a directory where this server
instance will look for .gto files to begin sharing content.
.TP
.BI \-\^\-security-api " signing-URI"
Required.  
.I signing-URI
is a fully-qualified URI which will sign CSRs for this server instance.
.TP
.BI \-\^\-foreground
Optional.  Run in the foreground (do not deamonize).
.TP
.BI \-\^\-pidfile " Pid-File"
Optional (unless
.I \-\^\-foreground
is present, then ignored).
.I Pid-File
Full path and filename of the process's pid.  Default value:  /var/run/gtserver/gtserver.pid  This must match program_PIDFILE value in the init.d script of used if the init.d script is to be used.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\^\-help
Print a usage message briefly summarizing these command-line options, then exit.
.TP
.B \-\^\-version
Print the version number of
.B GeneTorrent
to the standard output stream.  This version number should be included
in all bug reports.
.TP
.BI "\fR\fP \-\^\-allowed-modes" " [ALL|UPLOAD|DOWNLOAD|SERVER]"
In a restricted config file (see CONFIGURATION FILES below), this parameter
contains the modes in which GeneTorrent applications may operate
on this system.  This option can take multiple modes in a comma- or
colon-separated list.  Specifying ALL (the default) allows all
applications to run.
.TP
.BI "\fR\fP \-\^\-allowed-servers" " IP ranges"
Specify a list of IP addresses or IP address ranges that the GeneTorrent
applications may use for external communications (actors, transactors,
and web services).  Attempts to communicate with services outside of these
allowed IP address ranges will be denied.

IP addresses and ranges are given in dotted-decimal notation.  Entries
in the list are delimited by colon or comma characters.  Ranges are
given as dash-delimited IP address ranges.
.TP
.BI \-b " address" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-bind-ip" " address"
The IP address for GeneTorrent to bind.  Default is to bind all
addresses on the system.
.TP
.BI \-c " credential" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-credential-file" " credential"
Required for all applications, unless you are directly passing a .gto file to
the -d option.
.I credential
is the absolute or relative path to the file containing the
access credentials (security token) previously received from the
repository.  Alternatively,
.I credential
may be a  valid URI indicating where the credential resides on a server
accessible via HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, or FTPS.
.TP
.BI \-C " confdir" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-config-dir" " confdir"
Deprecated.  Please use \-R or \-\-resource-dir.
.TP
.BI \-\^\-config-file " configuration-file"
Specifies the absolute or relative path to a configuration file from
which to read program options.  (See below for format.) Virtually
every option that can be specified on the command line can also be
specified in the configuration file.  Options present on the command
line will override the contents of the configuration file.
.TP
.BI "\fR\fP \-\^\-disallow-user-config"
In a restricted config file (see CONFIGURATION FILES below), this parameter
specifies that GeneTorrent will not allow users to specify a config
file on the command line.
.TP
.BI \-e " address" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-advertised-ip" " address"
The IP address to advertise to the transactor.  This option is useful
when this actor is running behind a NAT firewall and the publicly
exposed IP address is not the same as the actual IP address.  The
default is to advertise the IP address of the host's default route, or
the address specified with the -b option.
.TP
.BI \-f " port" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-advertised-port" " port"
The first port to advertise to the transactor.  This option is useful
when this actor is running behind a NAT firewall and the publicly
exposed ports are not the same as the ports actually bound.  The range
of advertised ports will start at the port number specified in this
option, so for instance if 9 ports are configured, then the advertised
ports will run from 
.IR port " to " port "+8."
The default is to advertise the ports that are actually used.
.TP
.BI \-i " startPort\fR[:\fPendPort\fR]\fP" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-internal-port" " startPort\fR[:\fPendPort\fR]\fP"
Specifies the range of ports actually used by GeneTorrent.  By default
these ports are also advertised externally unless the -f option is
used.  If an endPort is not specified, 9 ports will be configured, so
.IR endPort " = " startPort " + 8."
The default is to use ports 20892 through 20900.
.TP
.BI \-k " minutes" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-inactivity-timeout" " minutes"
Specifies a duration of inactivity in minutes after
which GeneTorrent, in the download or upload application, will abort file
transfers and exit.  The activity measured to make this determination
is actual payload data transfer over the GeneTorrent protocol.  The
default behavior is to never timeout, which is the recommended
setting.  When using this setting, it is recommended that it be set
for 40 or more minutes.
.TP
.BI \-l " destination\fR[:\fPverbosity\fR]\fP" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-log" " destination\fR[:\fPverbosity\fR]\fP"
Specifies the destination of a log file and a verbosity level.
Possible values for the destination include "none", "stdout",
"stderr", "syslog", or a filename; the log output will be directed to
the destination specified.  Possible values for verbosity include (in
order of increasing volume of messages) "standard", "verbose", or
"full"; standard is the default.  The default behavior is no logging
if this parameter is not specified.
.TP
.BI \-R " resourcedir" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-resource-dir" " resourcedir"
Specify an absolute or relative path to the GeneTorrent static
resources directory.  This directory must contain \fBdhparam.pem\fP 
and should contain \fBcacert.pem\fP.
.TP
.BI \-\^\-use-bundled-certs
Specifies that GeneTorrent should use its own, bundled CA certificates for the
purpose of verifying SSL certificates presented by the server. The default is
to use the CA certificates provided by libcurl. The bundled certificates are
loaded from a file called cacert.pem located in the resource directory. The
path to the resource directory can be adjusted using the --resource-dir option.
On some distributions, libcurl's default CA certificates are rather stale, so
stale that otherwise valid server certificates aren't recognized as such. On
these distributions this flag can be used to work around these problems. On a
modern, well-maintained system, the use of this flag should not be necessary.
On Windows, this option is redundant since GeneTorrent always uses the bundled
certificates on that OS.
.TP
.BI \-v "\fR,\fP " \-\^\-verbose " level"
Controls the level of on-screen progress reporting to stdout.  By
default GeneTorrent offers no status information unless an error
occurs.  

The long and short forms of this option work slightly differently.
With the short form, you can receive summary progress information by
specifying a single -v, or detailed progress information by specifying
-vv (e.g., two -v's).  With the long form, you specify a numeric level
between 1 and 2; for instance, use --verbose=1 for summary progress
information.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\^\-timestamps
Specifies that the on-screen progress messages (controlled by the -v
flag, above) should include a timestamp.  This is primarily useful
when these messages are being redirected to a file for later review.
.TP
.BR \-\^\-null\-storage
Enable null storage implementation. This is a command line only option
and is not available in the configuration file.

A virtual storage device intended for a receive-only peer which throws away all
data received (rather than writing to disk).  Of course this means a receive
peer running in this mode cannot turn around and share any blocks it has
received.

This mode disables hash checking of the downloaded pieces so there is
no handling of currupt pieces, every piece downloaded is assumed
correct.

This mode can not be used to transmit files.

Use this mode when performance testing the client side of download
transfers.

Can not be used in conjunction with \fB\-\^\-zero\-storage\fP for a
given invocation of GeneTorrent.

In some cases it makes sense to use \fB\-\^\-zero\-storage\fP on the
server side and \fB\-\^\-null\-storage\fP on the download client side.
.TP
.BR \-\^\-zero\-storage
Enable zero storage implementation. This is a command line only option
and is not available in the configuration file.

A virtual storage device intended for a transmit or receive peer which throws
away all data received (rather than writing to disk). Transmitted data will
always consist of a stream of zeros. Of course this means the receive peer
running in this mode cannot turn around and share any blocks it has received.

The transmitter of the data must have a precomputed torrent file which hashes
properly since GeneTorrent will not be able to create a torrent file (.gto
file) when run in zero storage mode.

Can not be used in conjunction with \fB\-\^\-null\-storage\fP for a
given invocation of GeneTorrent.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILES
All options that can be specified on the command line can also be
specified in a user configuration file, which is specified on the command line
via the
.B --config-file
option.  A configuration file is a simple flat ASCII file with lines
of the form "parameter=value".  Except for 'help', 'version',
and 'config-file', any long-form option from the command line may be
used as a parameter, and the # character introduces a comment that
spans until the end of the line.

GeneTorrent applications also read two other configuration files
(if they exist).  The first is the file at /etc/GeneTorrent-restricted.conf.
The options given in this file express system-wide policy and are not
overridable by other configuration files or the command line options.
The second is the file at /etc/GeneTorrent.conf.  The options given
in this file function as system-wide defaults, which a user may override
with a configuration file or command line option.  Neither configuration
file is packaged with GeneTorrent, so by default neither is a source of
program options.

Sample GeneTorrent server configuration file:
.nf

# GeneTorrent configuration file
log=syslog:full
server=/cghub/data
queue=/cghub/data/workqueues/dropzone-app04
credential-file=/cghub/home/shared/gtorrent.pem
security-api=https://cghub-01.ucsc.edu:20000/cghub/data/gtsession
advertised-ip=8.29.11.197
advertised-port=6921
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gtdownload(1),
.BR gtserver(1),
.BR gtupload(1).
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co
2011-2012
Annai Systems, Inc.
.PP
This is free software;
see the source for copying conditions.
There is NO warranty;
not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

